Python sequence types let you create a slice.
The only sequence type we've looked at
so far is the string type, so let's
continue with our strings2 program.
What I'll do is delete all the code
except for the comment and the parrot
definition, so let's go ahead and do that.
So we can produce a slice by providing
three numbers separated by colons.
Now these numbers are the start, stop and step values. I'll introduce the step value
soon, but first let's look at slicing without a step. So we're going to type print
parentheses parrot left square bracket 0
colon 6 and right square bracket, then
our right parentheses. I'm going to add
a comment as well, hash N o w, sorry
N o r w e g. So here we're telling
Python to start at position 0 and slice
up to, but not including, position 6,
and I've added a comment with a hash
character there to indicate the result
that we should get. So if we run the
program now, we get the output in the
output pane, Norweg.
So when I said not including,
that's important and something
that new Python programmers often forget.
The last character you specify isn't
included in the slice. It turns out that
not including that last character makes
slices much easier to use, but it'll
probably catch you out at first. In fact,
not including that final value is
something that happens in other places
in Python, such as ranges.
Now don't do this if you're at work, in an open-plan
office, but if you're somewhere safe
where you're not going to get funny
looks, say out loud 10 times, "up to but not
including", "up to but not including", "up to
but not including". Alright, so getting
back to our code, the slice on line 5
produces the characters from index 0 up
to, but not including, index 6. So let's
see some more examples to understand how
slices work. So let's say we wanted the
characters w e from the string, then we'd
slice from position 3, the w, up to but
not including position 5,
the g. So let's type in the code for
that. So on line 6 I'm going to type
print left parenthesis parrot left square
bracket, then we're going to type 3
colon 5, as I mentioned, then our
right square bracket, right parenthesis,
and we'll run the program. We should see
w e outputted, and there's w e in the
output pane. So what else can we do?
Well we can get the first word by
getting the slice from position 0, up to
but not including position 9. So let's try that.
So print left parenthesis parrot
left square bracket 0 colon 9, then our
right square bracket and right
parenthesis, and we'll run that,
and there's the entire word, Norwegian. When creating a slice, the first value is the
position to start at, as you've seen.
That's separated from the position to
stop at with a colon, which again, you've
seen. But if you don't provide a start
value, you still need the colon. So we
could write that last slice, that we've
got on line 7, differently, by typing
print, on line 8, a left parenthesis
parrot left square bracket, then just
colon 9 this time, right square
bracket right parenthesis, and we can run
that. And as you see we get exactly the
same result, and that's this time, the
difference is, we didn't provide a start
value. Basically, our lines 7 & 8 both do
the same thing because the start value
defaults to the start of the sequence,
and obviously on line 7 we included the
start value and line 8, we didn't include it.
Alright so let's look at some slides to explain exactly what's going on here.
So at this point you should be able to create a slice
that returns the word blue, so pause the
video and come back when you've had a
go at that.
Alright, so welcome back. So to slice
the word blue from our string, we need to
start at position 10, and extend up to
position 14. So let's do that.
So I'm going to type print left parenthesis
parrot left square bracket, 10 colon 14
right square bracket and right parenthesis, and if we run that, we should see the word Blue.
And there's Blue on the screen. And again,
there's no character at position 14, but
remember that slices extend up to, but
not including, the stop value. We saw that
we can leave out the start value and it
will default to the start of the
sequence. If we leave out the stop value
then it defaults to the end of the
sequence. So that means that we can
rewrite the last line, line 10, on line 11,
as print left parenthesis parrot left
square bracket 10 colon, and this time
we're leaving off the other value. So
we've got a right square bracket and
right parenthesis and if I run that, we
get the same output, in this case, the
word Blue. It's important to include the
colon that separates the start and stop
values. We haven't provided a stop value,
but we still need the colon, so that Python knows that we want a slice.
Without the colon, that would be in
index, and we'd get a single character at
position 10. I mentioned that there are
four different things that square
brackets are used for, and slicing is
the second thing. They're used for indexing
and they used for slicing. If you use
square brackets for slicing, you must
have at least one colon, otherwise it's in fact, an index and not a slice.
Alright so I've got a question for you. Before I ask it, we'll have a quick recap.
If the first number in a slice is
omitted, the slice will start from the
beginning of the string, and if the
second number is omitted, it'll run to
the end of the string. So it's a recap,
print parentheses parrot left square
bracket colon 6 right square bracket
right parenthesis, and print left
parenthesis parrot left square bracket
6 colon, then a right square bracket and right parenthesis. So again, the first number in
a slice is omitted, the slice starts
at the beginning of the string, and if
the second number is omitted, it'll run
to the end of the string.
The slice indices are defined such as string
square bracket colon n + string square
bracket n colon, is the same as the
original string. So to show you what I
mean I'm going to type some code on line
16 this time, print left parenthesis
parrot left square bracket colon 6.
We've got a right square bracket,
+ this time, I'm going to add a space there,
and a plus, another space then parrot
left square bracket 6 colon, then we've
got our right square bracket and our
right parenthesis again.
So if we run this,
you can see, in fact, we've got the
entire Norwegian Blue outputted to the
screen. So at this point, my question to
you is, what happens if we only have a
colon in the slice? In other words, what
will this produce?
print left parenthesis
parrot left square bracket colon and right
square bracket parentheses. So have a
think about that and see if you can
figure it out before running the program.
Pause the video now and come back when
you've got an answer.
Alright so welcome back. Did you work it out?
Well if you don't provide a start value,
the slice starts at the beginning
of the sequence. So there's no start
value on line 18, so we start at the
beginning. Now if you don't provide a stop
value, the slice extends up to the end of
the sequence, and we haven't got a stop
value on line 18 either. So that means
the slice will start at the beginning
and extend right up to the end. So if we
run the program now,
we get the complete string printed out.
So you might be wondering at this point, why we'd don't want to do that.
When dealing with strings you probably wouldn't, and I'll
come back to it when we look at
another sequence type, a list.
When dealing with lists, a slice like this one, that
produces a copy of the entire original,
can be very useful. I've covered it now
because we're looking at start and stop
values in a slice, and we'll see some
practical applications of it, later in
the course. Alright I'm going to stop the video here.
Before watching the next video,
experiment with slices with different strings. So a good one that you
might want to experiment with, would be
this one which I'll add to the source code.
So letters equals, and we're going to
add the letters of the alphabet,
like so.
So that can be a good string to actually
experiment with, but you can use any
strings you want. Create some slices and
make sure you get the results you wanted.
Once you've done, that I'll see you in the next video.